---
layout: post
title: "Presenting at FHPNC'23"
date: 2023-06-12
comments: true
categories: talk, types, conference
---

I gave (half) a talk at [FHPNC'23](https://icfp23.sigplan.org/home/FHPNC-2023) about
implementation of effiecient blocked algorithms in rank-polymorphic
array languages and proving that they are correct.

The slides are [available here](/talks/2023-fhpnc), and the
paper [can be found here](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3609024.3609410)
The abstract follows.




Many numerical algorithms on matrices or tensors can be formulated in a
blocking style which improves performance due to better cache locality.
In imperative languages, blocking is achieved by introducing additional
layers of loops in a nested fashion alongside with suitable adjustments
in index computations. While this process is tedious and error-prone, it
is also difficult to implement a generically blocked version that would
support arbitrary levels of blocking.

At the example of matrix multiply, this paper demonstrates how
rank-polymorphic array languages enable the specification of such
generically blocked algorithms in a simple, recursive form. The depth of
the blocking as well as blocking factors can be encoded in the structure
of array shapes. In turn, reshaping arrays makes it possible to switch
between blocked and non-blocked arrays. Through rank-polymorphic array
combinators, any specification of loop boundaries or explicit index
computations can be avoided.

Firstly, we propose a dependently-typed framework for rank-polymorphic
arrays. We use it to demonstrate that all blocked algorithms can be
naturally derived by induction on the argument shapes. Our framework
guarantees lack of out-of-bound indexing, and we also prove that all the
blocked versions compute the same results as the canonical algorithm.
Secondly, we translate our specification to the array language SaC. Not
only do we show that we achieve similar conciseness in the
implementation, but we also observe good performance of the generated
code. We achieve a 7% improvement compared to the highly-optimised
OpenBLAS library, and 3% compared to Intel’s MKL library when running on
a 32-core shared-memory system.

